**Artificial intelligence in drug discovery: recent advances and future
perspective**

The article \"Artificial intelligence in drug discovery: recent advances
and future perspectives\" by Jiménez-Luna et al. (2021) explores the
profound impact that artificial intelligence (AI), particularly machine
learning (ML), has had on drug discovery. AI has transformed the area by
improving the speed, accuracy, and efficiency of finding possible
therapeutic candidates. This essay will go over the most current
developments in AI applications for drug discovery, as well as the
difficulties encountered, and potential directions indicated in the
paper.

Deep learning refers to the application of deep neural networks and
other advanced machine techniques to discover new drugs efficiently.
Deep learning plays a significant role in various stages of drug
development, from identifying potential drug candidates to predicting
their properties and optimizing them. Deep learning is used in
ligand-based quantitative structure-activity/property relationship
(QSAR/QSPR), structure-based modelling, de novo molecular design, and
synthesis prediction.

The impact of computational models on drug discovery such as QSAR/QSPR
modelling is evidenced by the successful prediction of biological
activity and pharmacokinetic parameters, viz. absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion, and toxicity. The structural features of
molecules in QSAR/QSPR modelling are converted into machine-readable
numbers using the hand-crafted molecular descriptors which capture a
variety of aspects of the underlying chemical structure. The transition
from the use of hand-crafted molecular descriptors to the use of complex
machine learning techniques such as support vector machines (SVM) and
gradient boosting machines (GBM) has allowed researchers and scientists
to capture nonlinear relationships between chemical structures and their
biological or physicochemical properties.

Deep learning, an advanced subset of machine learning, performs
automatic feature extraction during the training procedure. Graph neural
networks and recurrent neural networks are able to generate internal
context-specific representations of molecular structures. Deep learning
models are promising in handling tasks that classical descriptors
struggle with, such as modelling of peptides, and proteolysis-targeting
chimeras.

As machine learning and deep learning models continues to evolve, the
role of AI in personalized medicine is expected to grow, with future
models predicting optimal drug combinations and dosages for individual
patients.

AI integration with conventional drug discovery workflows is crucial,
but it presents technological and logistical difficulties.

Deep learning models are often referred to as "black boxes" because
their decision-making processes are difficult to interpret and also with
a limitation as they have high computational cost.

AI has demonstrated its transformative potential in drug discovery, with
recent advances that enhances accuracy, speed and cost efficiency of the
drug development process. The future perspectives of AI-driven drug
discovery hold the potential to not only enhance the discovery but also
to provide innovative solutions to some of the most challenging health
issues of our time. 

REFERENCES:

Jiménez-Luna, J., Grisoni, F., Weskamp, N., & Schneider, G. (2021).
Artificial intelligence in drug discovery: recent advances and future
perspectives. *Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery*, *16*(9), 949--959.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17460441.2021.1909567>

Video Presentation Link:
https://www.linkedin.com/posts/lwethu-twana-5165a3242_hello-everyone-i-have-thrilled-to-share-activity-7238262741935788032-2JZl?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop
